In this lecture, let's take a moment to talk about performance.
Performance is crucial for any site.
The slower a site loads, the more likely a user may leave our site.
We never want that to happen for the daily recipe block we wrote a custom SQL query for grabbing a random
recipe.
I haven't been completely honest.
WordPress has a solution for performing the same action.
We avoided the WordPress solution for one simple reason WordPress is solution is slower than a custom
query.
There are different ways to measure the performance of a line of code.
SQL has a feature called profiling.
However, setting up profiling can take a while.
Therefore, I'm going to show you a simple PHP solution for measuring the performance of a line of code.
In PHP, there's a function called micro time.
The micro time function will grab the current time in microseconds.
PHP is a very fast language.
Lines of code can finish running within microseconds.
The micro time function is the best way to measure how long a line of code takes to run.
Let me show you an example.
For the sake of brevity, I've updated the daily recipe block.
By measuring the SQL query, you do not need to follow along.
Feel free to sit back and relax in the daily recipe function.
I'm running the micro time function by defaults.
The micro time function returns a string.
A boolean value can be passed in to override this behavior by passing in.
True, the returned value will be a number.
The value returned by the micro time function is stored in a variable.
After storing the time, I'm running the same SQL query from the generate daily recipe dot PHP file.
This time the value is not stored.
We're not interested in the value.
We just want to measure the time it takes to run this query.
After the query finishes running, we are storing the time again.
Lastly, I'm calculating the time it took to run this line of code by subtracting the variables.
The result is stored in a variable called SQL execution time.
The same process is repeated.
However, in this example, I have recreated the same query with the WP query class.
The WP Query class will create and execute a query for you.
This allows you to avoid writing queries to grab a random value.
I set the order by option to random.
That's all there is to it.
The execution time is stored in a variable called WP execution time.
After calculating the execution times, I've updated the template to render both times in a paragraph
tag.
This should give us an idea of how long a query took to execute.
I'm going to refresh the page in the browser.
At the bottom of the daily recipe block the execution times get displayed.
Clearly the SQL query runs faster than the WordPress query.
I can continuously refresh the page to get similar results.
The SQL query will always outpace the WordPress query by a long shot.
This is not to say that WordPress is inefficient in most scenarios.
WordPress can perform just as fast as a raw query.
In fact, it can be safer to use the WordPress class whenever possible.
I prefer to use the WordPress query class.
I have made an exception for this block.
The query generated by WordPress is too slow.
It can severely impact the performance of a site if a query is too slow.
I will try writing a manual query and measure the differences.
In my opinion, the raw query is better than WordPress.
At the end of the day, it's completely up to you.
Let's start moving on to other topics in the next section.